



Path Aware Networking RG                                        M. Welzl
Internet-Draft                                        University of Oslo
Intended status: Informational                            9 October 2024
Expires: 12 April 2025


                        On-Path Proxy Discovery
                     draft-welzl-panrg-oppd-latest

Abstract

   [ Please add something to this draft, and then add your name to the
   author list.  Also, consider the draft title: it now indicates that
   I'm the primary dude here (is that really justified?), and that we
   target PANRG.  Should it carry a different name? ]

   This document surveys possibilities for On-Path Proxy Discovery
   (OPPD).  It is meant to help the conversation in a planned side
   meeting at IETF-121 in Dublin.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://mwelzl.github.io/oppd/draft-welzl-panrg-oppd.html.  Status
   information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-welzl-panrg-oppd/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Path Aware Networking
   RG Research Group mailing list (mailto:panrg@irtf.org), which is
   archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/panrg.
   Subscribe at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/panrg/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/mwelzl/oppd.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 12 April 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Terminology
   4.  General assumptions
   5.  A survey of possibilities
     5.1.  Sidekick
     5.2.  SMAQ
     5.3.  UDP options
     5.4.  Please insert your idea here
   6.  A survey of open issues
   7.  Examined material that was not included
   8.  Security Considerations
   9.  IANA Considerations
   10. References
     10.1.  Normative References
     10.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   Proxies can carry out functions that improve the performance of an
   end-to-end connection.  These function can be quite diverse, ranging
   from minimal help (e.g. just offering information) to more
   significant interference, e.g. splitting an end-to-end connection in
   half, for reliability, congestion control or both.

   It is commonly desirable for such proxies to be located on the
   path(s) that a connection already traverses, rather than using a
   tunneling method to enforce a path.  This is naturally the case for
   transparent "Performance Enhancing Proxies" (PEPs) that have been
   implemented for TCP, but the transparent nature of such proxies has
   caused a number of known problems in the past.  Non-transparent
   proxies leave the choice of utilizing and configuring a performance
   enhancing function to end systems -- and such a choice requires a
   means to detect the proxy and explicitly communicate with it.

   There are various ways in which On-Path Proxy Discovery (OPPD) can
   work, and they differ from the ways in which end systems learn about
   proxies that are not necessarily on-path.

   This document surveys some possibilities that are available for OPPD.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Terminology

   *  Base connection: an end-to-end connection between two endpoints on
      which an on-path proxy is expect to carry out a performance-
      improving function.

   *  Endpoint: an entity that communicates with one or more other
      endpoints using a specific transport protocol.  It is locally
      identified by the 5-tuple of IP address pair, protocol and port
      numbers.

4.  General assumptions

   *  On-path proxy devices are expected to carry out functions in
      relation to a base connection.  Thus, they must be on the same
      path, which means that communication with them must use the same
      5-tuple.

   *  Endpoint initiation: OPPD must be initiated by an endpoint.
      First, in the presence of NATs, this is the only way to ensure
      that communication with the proxy use the same IP addresses and
      port numbers as the base connection.  Second, in this way,
      endpoints can execute some kind of flow control to avoid the
      reception of many unsolicited announcements.

5.  A survey of possibilities

5.1.  Sidekick

   In [Sidekick], endpoints signal proxy support by sending a
   distinguished packet containing a 128-byte sidekick-request marker.
   Such inline signaling could confuse receivers, but sidekicks target
   protocols such as QUIC that discard cryptographically unauthenticated
   data anyway.

   The proxy replies to a sidekick-request packet by sending a special
   packet from the receiver's IP address and port number back to the
   endpoint.  This packet contains a sidekick-reply marker, an opaque
   session ID, and an IP address and port number for communicating with
   the proxy.  Upon receiving the sidekick-reply packet, the sender
   begins communicating directly with the proxy from a different UDP
   port.  It initially sends back the session ID and configuration
   parameters to start receiving quACKs (special ACKs crafted by a
   Sidekick proxy).

5.2.  SMAQ

   In [SMAQ], ...TODO.

5.3.  UDP options

   TODO.  Describe the possibility (if there is one?).

5.4.  Please insert your idea here

   ... or something that already exists.  And give a brief description
   of how it works.

6.  A survey of open issues

   Just an idea, having a separate list of common problems to be
   considered might be helpful.  For example:

   *  How to handle multiple proxies on a path?

   *  How to deal with multi-path?

      -  Suggestion (Michael): we ignore it, we just apply the discovery
         per path.  Endpoints are expected to initiate the discovery
         process for every path at which they want to make use of a
         proxy should a proxy be available.

   This list will become longer as we add mechanisms to the preceding
   section.

7.  Examined material that was not included

   [I-D.kuehlewind-quic-proxy-discovery] lists several possibilities for
   proxy discovery, but the proxies in question need not be on-path.
   One notable possibility mentioned in
   [I-D.kuehlewind-quic-proxy-discovery] document is the use of PCP;
   this is, in some sense, an on-path discovery method since NATs are
   necessarily on-path.  However, there is no reason to limit the
   discovery process described in the present document to scenarios with
   NATs only.

8.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security: for now this is copy+pasted text from the NSDI paper.

   A malicious third-party could execute a reflection amplification
   attack that generates a large amount of traffic while hiding its
   source.  This is possible because the sender requests quACKs to a
   different port and (for some carrier-grade NATs) IP address from the
   underlying session.  To mitigate this, each quACK contains a quota,
   initially 1, of remaining quACKs the proxy will send as well as an
   updated session ID.  The quota and session ID ensure only the sender
   can increase the quota or otherwise reconfigure the session.

   An adversarial PEP could send misleading information to the sender.
   Note that only on-path PEPs can send credible information, since they
   refer to unique packet identifiers.  To mitigate this, the sender can
   consider PEP feedback along with end-to-end metrics to determine
   whether to keep using the PEP.  The sender can always opt out of the
   PEP, and the PEP cannot actively manipulate traffic any more than
   outside a sidekick setting.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.kuehlewind-quic-proxy-discovery]
              Kühlewind, M. and Z. Sarker, "Discovery Mechanism for
              QUIC-based, Non-transparent Proxy Services", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-kuehlewind-quic-proxy-
              discovery-01, 27 January 2020,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-kuehlewind-
              quic-proxy-discovery-01>.

   [Sidekick] "Sidekick: In-Network Assistance for Secure End-to-End
              Transport Protocols", Usenix NSDI 2024 , 2024.

   [SMAQ]     "Secure Middlebox-Assisted QUIC", IFIP NETWORKING 2023 ,
              2023.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Author's Address

   Michael Welzl
   University of Oslo
   Email: michawe@ifi.uio.no
